Memory QOS Alpha2 KEP 2570 blog post (#39853)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-03-08-memory-qos-cgroups-v2/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: 'Quality-of-Service for Memory Resources'
date: 2021-11-26
slug: qos-memory-resources
---

> **Authors:** Tim Xu (Tencent Cloud)

Reviewer: As this is a new blog, you can set yourself as the author.

> Kubernetes v1.27, released in April 2023, introduced changes to an alpha feature, Memory QoS, that improves how Linux nodes implement memory resource requests and limits. Support for Memory QoS was initially added in Kubernetes v1.22, and later some [limitations](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2570-memory-qos#reasons-for-changing-the-formula-of-memoryhigh-calculation-in-alpha-v127) around the formula for calculating memory.high were identified. Those limitations are addressed in Kubernetes v1.27.

Reviewer 2: Please always **manually wrap** these long lines for 1) ease of review; 2) ease of change tracking, especially for the downstream localization teams.

Reviewer 2: Example:

```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.27, released in April 2023, introduced changes to an alpha feature,
Memory QoS, that improves how Linux nodes implement memory resource
requests and limits. Support for Memory QoS was initially added in Kubernetes v1.22,
and later some [limitations](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2570-memory-qos#reasons-for-changing-the-formula-of-memoryhigh-calculation-in-alpha-v127
around the formula for calculating memory.high were identified.
Those limitations are addressed in Kubernetes v1.27.
```

In prior releases, Kubernetes did not support memory quality guarantees. 
For example, if you set container resources as follows:
```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: example
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: "64Mi"
        cpu: "250m"
      limits:
        memory: "64Mi"
        cpu: "500m"
```
`spec.containers[].resources.requests`(e.g. cpu, memory) is designed for scheduling. When you create a Pod, the Kubernetes scheduler selects a node for the Pod to run on. Each node has a maximum capacity for each of the resource types: the amount of CPU and memory it can provide for Pods. The scheduler ensures that, for each resource type, the sum of the resource requests of the scheduled Containers is less than the capacity of the node.

`spec.containers[].resources.limits` is passed to the container runtime when the kubelet starts a container. CPU is considered a "compressible" resource. If your app starts hitting your CPU limits, Kubernetes starts throttling your container, giving your app potentially worse performance. However, it won’t be terminated. That is what "compressible" means.

> In cgroup v1, and prior to this feature, the container runtime never took into account and effectively ignored spec.containers[].resources.requests["memory"]. This is unlike CPU, in which the container runtime consider both requests and limits. Furthermore, memory actually can't be compressed in cgroup v1. Because there is no way to throttle memory usage, if a container goes past its memory limit it will be terminated by the kernel with an OOM (Out of Memory) kill.

Reviewer 2: `spec.containers[*].resources.requests["memory"]` is ignored??? In what sense?

Reviewer: kubelet will not take `requests` memory into account in cgroup v1 as there is no similar `memory.min` in cgroup v1.
The request of memory is mainly used in scheduling calculation that is based on node allocatable.

Reviewer: Actually, this is content from https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/11/26/qos-memory-resources/ that is not changed.

Fortunately, cgroup v2 brings a new design and implementation to achieve full protection on memory. The new feature relies on cgroups v2 which most current operating system releases for Linux already provide. With this experimental feature, [quality-of-service for pods and containers](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/quality-service-pod/) extends to cover not just CPU time but memory as well.

## How does it work?

> Memory QoS uses the memory controller of cgroup v2 to guarantee memory resources in Kubernetes. Memory requests and limits of containers in pod are used to set specific interfaces `memory.min` and `memory.high` provided by the memory controller. When `memory.min` is set to memory requests, memory resources are reserved and never reclaimed by the kernel; this is how Memory QoS ensures the availability of memory for Kubernetes pods. And if memory limits are set in the container, this means that the system needs to limit container memory usage, Memory QoS uses `memory.high` to throttle workload approaching it's memory limit, ensuring that the system is not overwhelmed by instantaneous memory allocation.

Reviewer 2: instanteneous or sporadic?

Container memory is always reserved, provided that `requests["memory"]` is specified, is this true?

Author: I think "increase in memory usage" makes more sense. PTAL

![](./memory-qos-cal.svg)

The following table details the specific functions of these two parameters and how they correspond to Kubernetes container resources.

<table>
    <tr>
        <th style="text-align:center">File</th>
        <th style="text-align:center">Description</th>
   </tr>
   <tr>
        <td>memory.min</td>

>         <td><code>memory.min</code> specifies a minimum amount of memory the cgroup must always retain, i.e., memory that can never be reclaimed by the system. If the cgroup's memory usage reaches this low limit and can’t be increased, the system OOM killer will be invoked.

Reviewer 2: > If the cgroup's memory usage reaches this low limit and can’t be increased, ...

The intent is to increase cgroup's memory usage?

        <br>
        <br>
        <i>We map it to the container's memory request</i>
        </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
       <td>memory.high</td>

>        <td><code>memory.high</code> is the memory usage throttle limit. This is the main mechanism to control a cgroup's memory use. If a cgroup's memory use goes over the high boundary specified here, the cgroup’s processes are throttled and put under heavy reclaim pressure. The default is max, meaning there is no limit. 

Reviewer 2: > The default is max, ...

What does 'max' mean here?

Reviewer: > memory.high
> - A read-write single value file which exists on non-root cgroups. The default is “max”.

The `max` is the file content of memory.high or memory.max when it is unlimited. The unlimited is so-called `noop` as well.

Reviewer 2: It is probably fine to copy paste contents from somewhere else, so long as the license permits.
However, when reading this post, we need to explain what do you mean by saying "max".

The same applies to the previous paragraphs. It doesn't matter whether the contents were copied from somewhere.
What really matters is that the new blog should be useful, precise and concise.
It is a bad article if people cannot understand what you are talking about.

Author: @tengqm this is a blog post for an existing feature which is modified in v1.27. Hence, I copied the blog post from previous version and added my changes on top of it. However, it does make sense to have a concise blog. I have restructured the blog, and have also added more details. Please take a look and let me know if there are more changes required.
cc: @pacoxu

If a container has no memory limit specified, we substitute limits.memory for node allocatable memory. Kubelet will use `Unified` via CRI to set `memory.high` in container level cgroup by rounding down the value to nearest page size. This can help improve stability when pod memory usage increases, ensuring that memory is throttled as it approaches the memory limit.

Based on user feedback for the Alpha feature in Kubernetes v1.22, some users would like to opt out of MemoryQoS on a per-pod basis to ensure there is no early memory throttling. Therefore, in Kubernetes v1.27 Memory QOS also supports memory.high to be set as per Quality of Service(QoS) for Pod classes. Following are the different cases for memory.high as per QOS classes:

1. Guaranteed pods by their QoS definition require memory requests=memory limits and are not overcommitted. Hence MemoryQoS feature is disabled on those pods by not setting memory.high. This ensures that Guaranteed pods can fully use their memory requests up to their set limit, and not hit any throttling.

2. Burstable pods by their QoS definition require at least one container in the Pod with CPU or memory request or limit set.
    

>     * When requests.memory and limits.memory are set, the forumula is used as-is:

Reviewer: forumula -> formula

---
layout: blog
title: 'Alpha Support for Quality-of-Service for Memory Resources'
date: 2023-03-08
slug: qos-memory-resources
---

**Authors:** Dixita Narang (Google)

Kubernetes v1.27, released in April 2023, introduced changes to an alpha feature,
Memory QoS, that improves memory management capabilites in Linux nodes. 

Support for Memory QoS feature was initially added in Kubernetes v1.22, and later some 
[limitations](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2570-memory-qos#reasons-for-changing-the-formula-of-memoryhigh-calculation-in-alpha-v127) 
around the formula for calculating memory.high were identified. These limitations are 
addressed in Kubernetes v1.27.

## Background

Kubernetes allows you to optionally specify how much of each resources a container needs
in the Pod specification. The most common resources to specify are CPU and Memory. 

> For example, a Pod spec with container resources could look like as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, a Pod manifest that defines container resource requirements could look like:
```

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: example
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: "64Mi"
        cpu: "250m"
      limits:
        memory: "64Mi"
        cpu: "500m"
```

* `spec.containers[].resources.requests`

>   When you specify the resource request for containers in a Pod, the [kube-scheduler](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/kube-scheduler/#kube-scheduler)

Reviewer 4: nit s/kube-scheduler/kubernetes scheduler

  uses this information to decide which node to place the Pod on. Each node has a 
  maximum capacity for each of the resource types: the amount of CPU and memory it 
  can provide for Pods. The scheduler ensures that, for each resource type, the sum
  of the resource requests of the scheduled containers is less than the capacity of

>   the node.

Reviewer 4: This is true, but it might be worth to clarify: the node's advertise capacity and allocatable where allocatable = capacity - reserved. The scheduler will only consider allocatable when making scheduling decisions. I don't think it's worth going too much about this in the blog since it's not relevant, but maybe worth to replace "capacity" with total allocatable here.

* `spec.containers[].resources.limits`

  When you specify the resource limit for containers in a Pod, the kubelet enforces 
  those limits so that the running containers are not allowed to use more of those 
  resources than the limits you set.

When a node with enough capacity to serve the requested resources has been identified, 
the kubelet starts the containers. When the kubelet starts a container as a part of a Pod, 
kubelet passes the container's requests and limits for CPU and memory to the container 
runtime. On Linux, the container runtime typically configures kernel cgroups as follows:

> * CPU limit

Reviewer 4: nit: I think this explanation is really great, but since the focus here is on memory qos, the CPU section is a bit irrelavent since this feature is only looking at memory. However, I think introducing these concepts and explaning this is still useful... hmm thoughts?

  CPU is considered a compressible resource. Linux kernel periodically checks to see if
  the CPU limit for a cgroup is exceeded. If your app starts hitting your CPU limits, 

>   Kubernetes starts throttling your container, giving your app potentially worse 

Reviewer 4: s/Kubernetes starts throttling/the linux kernel scheduler starts throttling

  performance. However, it won’t be terminated. That is what "compressible" means.
  

> * CPU request

Reviewer 4: nit: I would describe CPU requests first, before CPU limits

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **CPU request**
```
and the equivalent change elsewhere

  The CPU request typically defines a weighting. If several different containers (cgroups)
  want to run on a contended system, workloads with larger CPU requests are allocated more 

>   CPU time than workloads with small requests.

Reviewer 4: Is it worth to describe here that CPU requests (and requests in general) are used for scheduling?

  
* Memory limit
  
  The memory limit specifies the memory limit, beyond which if the container tries to allocate 
  more memory, Linux kernel will terminate it with an OOM (Out of Memory) kill.

  In cgroup v1, `memory.limit_in_bytes` interface is used to set the memory usage limit.

>   However, unlike CPU memory can't be compressed as cgroup v1 doesn't provide any interface

Reviewer 4: I would rephrase this a bit -- memory compression and memory throttling are different topics, so I would suggest to avoid mixing them. I think the point here we want to make is that an app in cgroupv1 using memory would be fine... and then as soon as hitting the limit get killed right away. There is no way to provide an early warning or attempt to reclaim memory usage before it would be too late and the containerd would be OOMd.

  to specify memory usage throttle limit. 

  In cgroup v2, `memory.max` is analogous to `memory.limit_in_bytes` in cgroupv1.
  And `memory.high` interface is introduced to specify memory usage throttling

>   limit. Memory QoS uses `memory.max` to specify memory limits, and `memory.high` 

Reviewer 4: I would add one sentence here to explain what exactly happens after `memory.high` is reached: The kernel starts to throttle the cgroup and put it under heavy reclaim.

  to throttle workload approaching its memory limit, ensuring that the system is
  not overwhelmed by OOM kills from containers trying to use memory beyond specified
  limits.

* Memory request

>   The memory request is mainly used by kube-scheduler during (Kubernetes) Pod 

Reviewer 4: s/mainly/only in cgroup v1.

  scheduling. In cgroup v1, there are no controls to specify the minimum amount
  of memory the cgroup must always retain. Hence, the container runtime did not
  use the value of requested memory set in the Pod Spec. 

>   cgroup v2 introduced `memory.min` interface to specify the minimum amount of memory

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  cgroups v2 introduced a `memory.min` setting, used to specify the minimum amount of memory
```

  a cgroup must always retain. If the memory usage of a cgroup is within its effective
  min boundary, the cgroup’s memory won’t be reclaimed under any conditions. If 
  there's no unprotected reclaimable memory available, OOM killer is invoked. Memory
  QoS maps `memory.min` to `spec.containers[].resources.requests.memory` to ensure

>   the availability of memory for containers in Kubernetes Pods. 

Reviewer 4: maybe `to ensure the availability of memory for containers in Kubernetes Pods - something that was not possible before cgroup v2 and MemoryQoS?`

> ## How it works?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## How it works
```

### Cgroup v2 memory controller interfaces & Kubernetes container resources mapping

> Memory QoS uses the memory controller of cgroup v2 to guarantee memory resources in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Memory QoS uses the memory controller of cgroups v2 to guarantee memory resources in
```

> Kubernetes. cgroupv2 interfaces that this feature: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes. This relies on the following settings from cgroups v2:
```

* `memory.max`
* `memory.min`
* `memory.high`.

![](./memory-qos-cal.svg)

`memory.max` is mapped to memory limit specified in the Pod spec. The kubelet (and 

> the container runtime) enforces the limit and prevent the container from using more

Reviewer 4: s/prevent/prevents

than the configured resource limit. If a process in a container tries to consume
more than the specified limit, kernel terminates the process with an out of
memory Out of Memory (OOM) error. 

![](./container-memory-max.svg)  
<sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

`memory.min` is mapped to memory requests, which results in reservation of memory resources
that can never reclaimed by the kernel. This is how Memory QoS ensures the availability of 
memory for Kubernetes pods. If there's no unprotected reclaimable memory available, OOM 

> kill is invoked.

Reviewer 4: nit: s/OOM kill/OOM killer

![](./container-memory-min.svg)  
<sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

For memory protection, in addition to the original way of limiting memory usage, Memory QoS
throttles workload approaching its memory limit, ensuring that the system is not overwhelmed
by sporadic increases in memory usage. A new field, MemoryThrottlingFactor, is introduced in
the KubeletConfiguration which is set to 0.9 by default. `memory.high` is calculated by using
MemoryThrottlingFactor, `spec.containers[].resources.requests.memory` and
`spec.containers[].resources.limits.memory` as in the formula below, and rounding down the
value to the nearest page size:

![](./container-memory-high.svg)  
<sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

**Summary:**
<table>
    <tr>
        <th style="text-align:center">File</th>

>         <th style="text-align:center">Description</th>

Reviewer 3: Don't put CSS in tables unless it's truly unavoidable.

   </tr>
   <tr>

>         <td>memory.max</td>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        <td><tt>memory.max</tt></td>
```

>         <td><code>memory.max</code> specifies the maximum memory limit, a container is allowed to use. If a container tries to consume more memory than the configured limit, kernel terminates the process with an Out of Memory (OOM) error. 
>         <br>
>         <br>
>         <i>We map it to the container's memory limit</i>

Reviewer 3: This will work better as semantic HTML. For example:
```suggestion
        <td>
         <p><tt>memory.max</tt> specifies the maximum memory limit that a container is allowed to use.
            If a container tries to consume more memory than the configured limit, the kernel terminates
            the process with an Out of Memory (OOM) error.
        </p> 
        <p><em>Kubernetes maps it to the container's memory limit.</em></p>
```

        </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
        <td>memory.min</td>
        <td><code>memory.min</code> specifies a minimum amount of memory the cgroup must always retain, i.e., memory that can never be reclaimed by the system.
        If there's no unprotected reclaimable memory available, OOM kill is invoked.
        <br>
        <br>
        <i>We map it to the container's memory request</i>
        </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
       <td>memory.high</td>

>        <td><code>memory.high</code> is the memory usage throttle limit. This is the main mechanism to control a cgroup's memory use. If a cgroup's memory use goes over the high boundary specified here, the cgroup’s processes are throttled and put under heavy reclaim pressure. The default is maximum, meaning there is no limit. 

Reviewer 4: > The default is maximum, meaning there is no limit

I don't fully understand this point -- aren't we seeting `memory.high` when MemoryQoS is enabled? Or is this referring to the default when the feature is disabled?

       <br>
       <br>
       <i>We use a formula to calculate <code>memory.high</code>, depending on container's memory request, memory limit or node allocatable memory (if container's memory limit is empty) and a throttling factor. Please refer to the KEP for more details on the formula.</i>
       </td>
   </tr>
</table>

**Note**: If a container has no memory limit specified, we substitute limits.memory for node allocatable memory.

### Support for Pod QoS classes
Based on user feedback for the Alpha feature in Kubernetes v1.22, some users would like 
to opt out of MemoryQoS on a per-pod basis to ensure there is no early memory throttling.
Therefore, in Kubernetes v1.27 Memory QOS also supports memory.high to be set as per 
Quality of Service(QoS) for Pod classes. Following are the different cases for memory.high
as per QOS classes:

> 1. **Guaranteed pods** by their QoS definition require memory requests=memory limits and are 

Reviewer 3: This should be (based on the style guide):
```suggestion
1. _Guaranteed_ pods by their QoS definition require memory requests equal to memory limits, and are 
```

> not overcommitted. Hence MemoryQoS feature is disabled on those pods by not setting 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
not overcommitted. Hence the memory QoS feature has no effect on these Pods: the kubelet
does not set
```

> memory.high. This ensures that Guaranteed pods can fully use their memory requests up

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`memory.high`. This ensures that Guaranteed pods can fully use their memory requests up
```

to their set limit, and not hit any throttling.

2. **Burstable pods** by their QoS definition require at least one container in the Pod with
CPU or memory request or limit set.
    
    * When requests.memory and limits.memory are set, the formula is used as-is:
    ![](./container-memory-high-limit.svg)  

>     <sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

Reviewer 3: Why is this subscript?
```suggestion
    (<em>i</em>: the <i>i</i><sup>th</sup> container in one pod)
```
Does that work?

    * When requests.memory is set, limits.memory is not set, we substitute limits.memory
    for node allocatable memory in the formula:
    ![](./container-memory-high-no-limits.svg)  
    <sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

> 3. BestEffort The pod gets a BestEffort class if limits.memory and requests.memory are not 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. A pod gets a _BestEffort_ class if `limits.memory` and `requests.memory` are not
```

set. We set requests.memory = 0 and substitute limits.memory for node allocatable memory 
in the formula:

    ![](./container-memory-high-best-effort.svg)  
    <sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

> 

Reviewer 4: It might be worth to summarize here - the summary is only pods in burstable and best effort QoS will set `memory.high`. Guaranteed QoS pods do not set `memory.high` because their memory is guaranteed.

> ### Cgroup Hierarchy

Reviewer 3: ```markdown
### Memory calculations for the control group hierarchy {#cgroup-hierarchy}#
```
maybe?

When container memory requests are made, kubelet passes `memory.min` to the back-end 
CRI runtime (possibly containerd, cri-o) via the `Unified` field in CRI during 
container creation. The `memory.min` in container level cgroup will be set to:  

![](./container-memory-min.svg)  
<sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

Since the `memory.min` interface requires that the ancestor cgroup directories are all 
set, the pod and node cgroup directories need to be set correctly. 

`memory.min` in pod level cgroup:  
![](./pod-memory-min.svg)  
<sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

> `memory.min` in node level cgroup:  

Reviewer 3: What if the container runtime isn't running Pods and sandboxes in the root cgroup? (I don't know if we support this). I'd imagine the sysadmin then has to set `memory.min` appropriately outside of Kubernetes.

Reviewer 4: The MemoryQoS feature will enforce `memory.min` on the node level kubepods cgroup (see [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/330b5a2b8dbd681811cb8235947557c99dd8e593/pkg/kubelet/cm/node_container_manager_linux.go#L150).

This cgroup is managed by the kubelet and all pods are children of it, so it's not possible to create pods that run outside of it (unless you are running containers directly via the container runtime unmanaged by kubelet).

Reviewer 3: Is this right?
```suggestion
`memory.min` in node level cgroup (for example, `kubepods.slice` if you use the systemd driver):
```

![](./node-memory-min.svg)  
<sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> pod in one node, j: the j<sup>th</sup> container in 
one pod</sub>

Kubelet will manage the cgroup hierarchy of the pod level and node level cgroups 

> directly using runc libcontainer library, while container cgroup limits are managed by the container runtime.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
directly using the libcontainer library (from the runc project), while container cgroup limits are managed by the
container runtime.
```

## How do I use it?
Here are the prerequisites for enabling Memory QoS on your Linux node, some of these are 

> related to [Kubernetes support for cgroup v2](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2254-cgroup-v2).

Reviewer 4: It might be worth to link directly to the cgroupv2 k8s docs - https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cgroups/ instead of the KEP

1. Kubernetes since v1.27
2. [runc](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc) since v1.0.0-rc93; [containerd](https://containerd.io/)
since 1.4; [cri-o](https://cri-o.io/) since 1.20

> 3. Linux kernel minimum version: 4.15, recommended version: 5.2+

Reviewer 4: I would just link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cgroups/#requirements and avoid repeating this info here

4. Linux image with cgroupv2 enabled or enabling cgroupv2 unified_cgroup_hierarchy manually

> OCI runtimes such as runc and crun already support cgroups v2 [`Unified`](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/master/config-linux.md#unified), and Kubernetes CRI has also made the desired changes to support passing [`Unified`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/102578). However, CRI Runtime support is required as well. Memory QoS in Alpha phase is designed to support containerd and cri-o. Related PR [Feature: containerd-cri support LinuxContainerResources.Unified #5627](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/pull/5627) has been merged and released in containerd 1.6. CRI-O [implement kube alpha features for 1.22 #5207](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/5207) has been merged and released in 1.22.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OCI runtimes such as crun and runc already support cgroups v2 [`Unified`](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/master/config-linux.md#unified),
and Kubernetes has also made the desired CRI changes to support passing
[`Unified`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/102578).
However, support is required in CRI-compatible runtimes as well.
Memory QoS in alpha phase is designed to support containerd and cri-o.
A related PR, [Feature: containerd-cri support LinuxContainerResources.Unified](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/pull/5627), has been merged and released in containerd 1.6
 CRI-O PR [implement kube alpha features for 1.22](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/5207) has been
 merged and released in CRI-O 1.22.
```
Several things going on here. We list 3rd party products in alphabetical order, for example.

## How do I get involved?

> We offer huge thank you to all the contributors who helped with design, implementation,

Reviewer 3: Explain who “we” means (or reword). Does it mean Google?

  The memory request is mainly used by kube-scheduler during (Kubernetes) Pod 
  scheduling. In cgroup v1, there are no controls to specify the minimum amount
  of memory the cgroup must always retain. Hence, the container runtime did not
  use the value of requested memory set in the Pod manifest. 

  cgroups v2 introduced a `memory.min` setting, used to specify the minimum amount of memory
  a cgroup must always retain. If the memory usage of a cgroup is within its effective
  min boundary, the cgroup’s memory won’t be reclaimed under any conditions. If 
  there's no unprotected reclaimable memory available, the kernel invokes its 
  OOM killer. Memory QoS maps `memory.min` to `spec.containers[].resources.requests.memory`
  to ensure the availability of memory for containers in Kubernetes Pods. 

* **Memory limit**
  
  The memory limit specifies the memory limit, beyond which if the container tries to allocate 
  more memory, Linux kernel will terminate it with an OOM (Out of Memory) kill.

  In cgroup v1, `memory.limit_in_bytes` interface is used to set the memory usage limit.
  However, unlike CPU memory can't be compressed as cgroup v1 doesn't provide any interface

>   to specify memory usage throttle limit. 

Reviewer 4: nit: Add comma above: However, unlike CPU, memory...

Reviewer 4: I would also recommend to avoid using the word compressed when referring to memory as it is a bit confusing and can refer some other meanings as well (e.g. there is actually memory compression feature called zswap, but it's unrelated here :)

How about just referring to this as:

```
  In cgroup v1, `memory.limit_in_bytes` interface is used to set the memory usage limit.
  However, unlike CPU, it was not possible to apply memory throttling: as soon as a container crossed the memory limit, it would be OOM killed. 
  ```

  In cgroup v2, `memory.max` is analogous to `memory.limit_in_bytes` in cgroupv1.
  And `memory.high` interface is introduced to specify memory usage throttling
  limit. Memory QoS uses `memory.max` to specify memory limits, and `memory.high` 
  to throttle workload approaching its memory limit, ensuring that the system is
  not overwhelmed by OOM kills from containers trying to use memory beyond specified

>   limits.  

Reviewer 4: I would repharse this a bit. MemoryQoS cannot avoid OOM for workloads that continuously allocate memory. how about something like:

> ensuring that as containers reach their `memory.high` limits, the kernel is able to reclaim memory which may avoid an OOM.

Author: PTAL @bobbypage

Reviewer 4: Thank you for update looks great!

## How it works

### Cgroup v2 memory controller interfaces & Kubernetes container resources mapping

Memory QoS uses the memory controller of cgroup v2 to guarantee memory resources in
Kubernetes. cgroupv2 interfaces that this feature: 
* `memory.max`
* `memory.min`
* `memory.high`.

![](./memory-qos-cal.svg)

`memory.max` is mapped to memory limit specified in the Pod spec. The kubelet (and 
the container runtime) enforces the limit and prevent the container from using more
than the configured resource limit. If a process in a container tries to consume
more than the specified limit, kernel terminates the process with an out of
memory Out of Memory (OOM) error. 

![](./container-memory-max.svg)  
<sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

`memory.min` is mapped to memory requests, which results in reservation of memory resources
that can never reclaimed by the kernel. This is how Memory QoS ensures the availability of 
memory for Kubernetes pods. If there's no unprotected reclaimable memory available, OOM 
killer is invoked.

![](./container-memory-min.svg)  
<sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

> For memory protection, in addition to the original way of limiting memory usage, Memory QoS

Author: I have reframed the last sentence in this paragraph as "`memory.high` is mapped to throttling limit calculated by..."

PTAL. I think it is required to introduce MemoryThrottlingFactor before introducing the formula. Please let me know if you think I should re-frame this.

as per QOS classes:

1. **Guaranteed pods** by their QoS definition require memory requests=memory limits and are 
not overcommitted. Hence MemoryQoS feature is disabled on those pods by not setting 
memory.high. This ensures that Guaranteed pods can fully use their memory requests up
to their set limit, and not hit any throttling.

2. **Burstable pods** by their QoS definition require at least one container in the Pod with
CPU or memory request or limit set.
    
    * When requests.memory and limits.memory are set, the formula is used as-is:
    ![](./container-memory-high-limit.svg)  
    <sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

    * When requests.memory is set, limits.memory is not set, we substitute limits.memory
    for node allocatable memory in the formula:
    ![](./container-memory-high-no-limits.svg)  
    <sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

3. BestEffort The pod gets a BestEffort class if limits.memory and requests.memory are not 
set. We set requests.memory = 0 and substitute limits.memory for node allocatable memory 
in the formula:

    ![](./container-memory-high-best-effort.svg)  

>     <sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

Author: as per the KEP, throttling occurs for Best Effort case also. I think it makes sense to mention it. Please let me know your thoughts...

---
layout: blog

> title: 'Alpha Support for Quality-of-Service for Memory Resources'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: 'Kubernetes 1.27: Quality-of-Service for Memory Resources (alpha)'
```

> date: 2023-03-08

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this date needs an update.

Reviewer 3: Yep, the assigned date is 2023-05-05.

Please also update the filename @ndixita, to match.

slug: qos-memory-resources
---

**Authors:** Dixita Narang (Google)

> Kubernetes v1.27, released in April 2023, introduced changes to an alpha feature,

Reviewer 2: The change itself is about a new Alpha feature rather than an existing one?

```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.27, released in April 2023, introduced changes as an alpha feature,
```

Author: These are changes to an existing alpha feature

Memory QoS, that improves memory management capabilites in Linux nodes. 

Support for Memory QoS feature was initially added in Kubernetes v1.22, and later some 
[limitations](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2570-memory-qos#reasons-for-changing-the-formula-of-memoryhigh-calculation-in-alpha-v127) 

> around the formula for calculating memory.high were identified. These limitations are 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
around the formula for calculating `memory.high` were identified. These limitations are 
```

        memory: "64Mi"
        cpu: "500m"
```

* `spec.containers[].resources.requests`

  When you specify the resource request for containers in a Pod, the 
  [Kubernetes scheduler](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/kube-scheduler/#kube-scheduler)
  uses this information to decide which node to place the Pod on. The scheduler
  ensures that for each resource type, the sum of the resource requests of the 
  scheduled containers is less than the total allocatable resources on the node.

* `spec.containers[].resources.limits`

  When you specify the resource limit for containers in a Pod, the kubelet enforces 
  those limits so that the running containers are not allowed to use more of those 
  resources than the limits you set.

When the kubelet starts a container as a part of a Pod, kubelet passes the 
container's requests and limits for CPU and memory to the container runtime.
The container runtime assigns both CPU request and CPU limit to a container.
Provided the system has free CPU time, containers are guaranteed to be 
allocated as much CPU as it requests. Containers cannot use more CPU than
the configured limit i.e. containers CPU usage will be throttled if they

> use more CPU then the specified limit within a given time slice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use more CPU than the specified limit within a given time slice.
```

Prior to Memory QoS feature, the container runtime only used the memory

> limit and discarded the memory request. If a container uses more memory

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
limit and discarded the memory `request` (requests were, and still are, also used to influence
[scheduling](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/#scheduling)).
If any container attempts to use more memory
```

than the configured limit, the Linux Out Of Memory (OOM) killer will kill
the process in the container that tried to allocate the extra memory.

Let's compare how the container runtime on Linux typically configures memory
request and limit in cgroups, with and without Memory QoS feature:

* **Memory request**

>   The memory request is mainly used by kube-scheduler during (Kubernetes) Pod 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The memory `request` is mainly used by kube-scheduler during (Kubernetes) Pod 
```

  scheduling. In cgroup v1, there are no controls to specify the minimum amount
  of memory the cgroup must always retain. Hence, the container runtime did not
  use the value of requested memory set in the Pod spec.

  cgroups v2 introduced a `memory.min` setting, used to specify the minimum amount of memory
  a cgroup must always retain. If the memory usage of a cgroup is within its effective
  min boundary, the cgroup’s memory won’t be reclaimed under any conditions. If 
  there's no unprotected reclaimable memory available, the kernel invokes its 
  OOM killer. Memory QoS maps `memory.min` to `spec.containers[].resources.requests.memory`
  to ensure the availability of memory for containers in Kubernetes Pods. 

* **Memory limit**
  

>   The memory limit specifies the memory limit, beyond which if the container tries to allocate 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The memory `limit` specifies the memory limit, beyond which if the container tries to allocate 
```

  more memory, Linux kernel will terminate it with an OOM (Out of Memory) kill.

  In cgroup v1, `memory.limit_in_bytes` interface is used to set the memory usage limit.
  However, unlike CPU, it was not possible to apply memory throttling: as soon as a
  container crossed the memory limit, it would be OOM killed.

>   In cgroup v2, `memory.max` is analogous to `memory.limit_in_bytes` in cgroupv1.

Reviewer 2: be consistent about 'cgroups v1', 'cgroup v1' or 'cgroupv1'.

Reviewer 3: (I'd say “cgroups” - plural - when describing the version of it)

See https://www.redhat.com/sysadmin/cgroups-part-one for an example of idiomatic use.

  Memory QoS maps `memory.max` to `spec.containers[].resources.limits.memory` to
  specify the hard limit for memory usage. If the memory consumption goes above this
  level, the kernel invokes its OOM Killer.

  cgroup v2 also added `memory.high` configuration . Memory QoS uses `memory.high`
  to set memory usage throttle limit. If the `memory.high` limit is breached,
  the offending cgroups are throttled, and the kernel tries to reclaim memory
  which may avoid an OOM kill.

## How it works

### Cgroup v2 memory controller interfaces & Kubernetes container resources mapping

Memory QoS uses the memory controller of cgroup v2 to guarantee memory resources in
Kubernetes. cgroupv2 interfaces that this feature: 
* `memory.max`
* `memory.min`
* `memory.high`.

> ![](./memory-qos-cal.svg)

Reviewer 3: nit: we prefer to refer to images using site-relative paths (eg `/blog/2023/03/08/qos-memory-resources/memory-qos-cal.svg`)

nit: we like to set alt attributes to help with accessibility

nit: we recommend using a [figure](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#figure) shortcode for technical figures

> `memory.max` is mapped to memory limit specified in the Pod spec. The kubelet (and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`memory.max` is mapped to memory `limits` specified in the Pod spec. The kubelet (and 
```

the container runtime) enforces the limit and prevent the container from using more
than the configured resource limit. If a process in a container tries to consume
more than the specified limit, kernel terminates the process with an out of
memory Out of Memory (OOM) error. 

![](./container-memory-max.svg)  

> <sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

Reviewer 3: nit: we recommend using a [figure](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#figure) shortcode for technical figures

> `memory.min` is mapped to memory requests, which results in reservation of memory resources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`memory.min` is mapped to memory `requests`, which results in reservation of memory resources
```

that can never reclaimed by the kernel. This is how Memory QoS ensures the availability of 
memory for Kubernetes pods. If there's no unprotected reclaimable memory available, OOM 
killer is invoked.

![](./container-memory-min.svg)  

> <sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

Author: Done, makes it difficult to preview though in Vscode

For memory protection, in addition to the original way of limiting memory usage, Memory QoS
throttles workload approaching its memory limit, ensuring that the system is not overwhelmed

> by sporadic increases in memory usage. A new field, MemoryThrottlingFactor, is introduced in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by sporadic increases in memory usage. A new field, `memoryThrottlingFactor`, is introduced in
```

Reviewer 3: I presume that the new field is only available when you activate that feature gate. Have I got that right?

Author: yes, modified the sentence to mention the availability of memoryThrottlingFactor when fearyre is enabled

the KubeletConfiguration which is set to 0.9 by default. `memory.high` is mapped to throttling

> limit calculated by using MemoryThrottlingFactor, `spec.containers[].resources.requests.memory`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
limit calculated by using `memoryThrottlingFactor`, `spec.containers[].resources.requests.memory`
```

and `spec.containers[].resources.limits.memory` as in the formula below, and rounding down the
value to the nearest page size:

![](./container-memory-high.svg)  

> <sub>i: the i<sup>th</sup> container in one pod</sub>

Reviewer 3: nit: we recommend using a [figure](https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#figure) shortcode for technical figures

> **Note**: If a container has no memory limit specified, we substitute limits.memory for node allocatable memory.

Reviewer 3: Try one of these:
```suggestion
**Note**: If a container has no memory limit specified, Kubernetes substitutes `limits.memory` for node allocatable memory.
```
or
```suggestion
**Note**: If a container has no memory limit specified, substitute `limits.memory` for node allocatable memory.
```
In the second one “substitute” is short for “you should substitute”.

        <th style="text-align:center">Description</th>
   </tr>
   <tr>
        <td>memory.max</td>
        <td><code>memory.max</code> specifies the maximum memory limit, a container is allowed to use. If a container tries to consume more memory than the configured limit, kernel terminates the process with an Out of Memory (OOM) error. 
        <br>
        <br>
        <i>We map it to the container's memory limit</i>
        </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
        <td>memory.min</td>
        <td><code>memory.min</code> specifies a minimum amount of memory the cgroup must always retain, i.e., memory that can never be reclaimed by the system.
        If there's no unprotected reclaimable memory available, OOM kill is invoked.
        <br>
        <br>
        <i>We map it to the container's memory request</i>
        </td>
   </tr>
   <tr>
       <td>memory.high</td>
       <td><code>memory.high</code> is the memory usage throttle limit. This is the main mechanism to control a cgroup's memory use. If a cgroup's memory use goes over the high boundary specified here, the cgroup’s processes are throttled and put under heavy reclaim pressure.
       <br>
       <br>

>        <i>We use a formula to calculate <code>memory.high</code>, depending on container's memory request, memory limit or node allocatable memory (if container's memory limit is empty) and a throttling factor. Please refer to the KEP for more details on the formula.</i>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       <i>Kubernetes use a formula to calculate <code>memory.high</code>,
       depending on container's memory request, memory limit or node allocatable memory
       (if container's memory limit is empty) and a throttling factor.
       Please refer to the KEP for more details on the formula.</i>
```

       </td>
   </tr>
</table>

> **Note** `memory.high` is set only on container level cgroups while memory.min is set on

Reviewer 2: Please do consistently use code style when referring to a field name or property name.

```suggestion
**Note** `memory.high` is set only on container level cgroups while `memory.min` is set on
```

Author: Noted, will be careful from next time onwards.

Guaranteed QoS pods do not set memory.high as their memory is guaranteed.

### `memory.min` calculations for cgroup heirarchy

When container memory requests are made, kubelet passes `memory.min` to the back-end 
CRI runtime (possibly containerd, cri-o) via the `Unified` field in CRI during 
container creation. The `memory.min` in container level cgroup will be set to:  

$memory.min =  pod.spec.containers[i].resources.requests[memory]$  
<sub>for every i<sup>th</sup> container in a pod</sub>

Since the `memory.min` interface requires that the ancestor cgroup directories are all 
set, the pod and node cgroup directories need to be set correctly. 

`memory.min` in pod level cgroup:  
$memory.min = \sum_{i=0}^{no. of pods}pod.spec.containers[i].resources.requests[memory]$  

`memory.min` in node level cgroup:  
$memory.min = \sum_{i}^{no. of nodes}\sum_{j}^{no. of pods}pod[i].spec.containers[j].resources.requests[memory]$  

Kubelet will manage the cgroup hierarchy of the pod level and node level cgroups 
directly using the libcontainer library (from the runc project), while container
cgroup limits are managed by the container runtime.

## How do I use it?

> The prerequisites for enable Memory QoS feature on your Linux node are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The prerequisites for enabling the Memory QoS feature on your Linux node are:
```

1. Verify the [requirements](/docs/concepts/architecture/cgroups/#requirements) 
related to [Kubernetes support for cgroup v2](/docs/concepts/architecture/cgroups)
are met. 
2. Ensure CRI Runtime supports Memory QoS. In Alpha phase of this feature,
only containerd and cri-o are supported. Related PRs:
    * Containerd: [Feature: containerd-cri support LinuxContainerResources.Unified #5627](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/pull/5627).
    * CRI-O: [implement kube alpha features for 1.22 #5207](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/5207).

> Memory QoS is in alpha for Kubernetes v1.27. You can enable the feature by setting

Reviewer 3: (optionally)
```suggestion
Memory QoS remains an alpha feature for Kubernetes v1.27. You can enable the feature by setting
```

the command line arguments:

```

> --feature-gates="...,MemoryQoS=true"

Reviewer 3: For the kubelet, setting `--feature-gates` is **deprecated** and we therefore shouldn't recommend it. Instead, suggest editing the kubelet config file.

```

## How do I get involved?

> Huge thank you to all the contributors who helped with design, implementation,

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
Huge thank you to all the contributors who helped with the design, implementation,
```
